# Week 7: February 18 - 22, 2019

Beginning this week, the [MUSE Hobby Laser](https://fslaser.com/Muse) provided to us by the PCC Cascade Fab Lab will be in our classroom during the following times:

* **Monday**: 12 PM - 8 PM
* **Tuesday**: 9 AM - 6 PM
* **Thursday**: All day
* **Friday**: All day

Students can train on the laser cutter to use for personal projects during any of these times by making an appointment with the instructor. Some amount of in-class training will be provided over Weeks 7 and 8, though class projects must take priority during class time.

## Laser Cutting and Engraving

### Safety

First things first: the laser cutter has the potential to become hazardous when certain rules and conditions are not followed. Note that the laser cutter should **always** be monitored while in use and handled with adequate care, and as such, the _instructor must always be present for its use in or out of work experience_. Following the rules set out below will be crucial to learning and utilizing the laser cutter at any time:

* Do **NOT** look directly at the laser while it cuts!
* **NEVER** leave the laser unattended while cutting! This is a _tremendous_ fire hazard!
* Ensure that the BOFA AD350 fume extractor is **ON** during operation of the laser cutter; it works to contain potentially toxic fumes. If you _smell_ something, **STOP** the laser cutter and _say_ something!
* Know what material you're working with - if you're not sure, do **NOT** attempt to cut it! Some materials emit _extremely_ toxic fumes when cut that the laser cutter / fume extractor cannot handle.

### Common Terminology

The laser cutter utilizes two methods for cutting and engraving - **vector** and **raster**. If we refer back to our discussion on _digital_ signals, we can easily identify how vectoring and rastering are distinct from one another despite the laser cutter only receiving simple ON / OFF instructions:

* **Vector**: a static ON signal that cuts continuous lines; only turns OFF when the laser is moving to its next destination
* **Raster**: a quickly-repeated series of ON/OFF signals, "dotting" the material surface up to 1000 times per inch

We use vector lines for both **vector cutting** and **vector engraving**. Vector **cutting** means to go all the way through a material, allowing users to cut complete shapes or text out of a larger piece of material or create drill holes without the use of other tools. **Engraving** means burning into the material without creating holes or gaps - this often produces a clean outline of text or designs with a slight burn along the path. Vectors drawn in Adobe Illustrator must be saved in the **.svg** file format (scalable vector graphic); they are quicker to run than raster jobs, but limited to drawing lines equivalent in size to the laser's maximum width.

**Rastering** does _not_ allow us to cut through a material, but **etches** the surface of our material with a graphic of our choice. This graphic is often a picture or photograph using greyscale or high contrast black-and-white filtering; as you might imagine, black-and-white simply creates two layers. Greyscale, however, allows us to create tangible depth in our laser cut images. While raster jobs take _much, much_ longer than vector, our options for what we can draw on a material's surface are vastly greater in terms of depth and the materials available to us. Some materials which cannot be cut by the laser _can_ be raster etched!

**[&larr; Previous Week](http://www.jlaurentpdx.github.io/beginning-maker-tech/week/5)** | Next Week &rarr;
